---
jlbp:
  id: JLBP-11
permalink: /JLBP-11
draft: true
title: Write great documentation
---

{% include links.md %}

There are two kinds of document that are critical to developers when working with an SDK: JavaDoc, and more in-depth articles (tutorials on how to get started, etc, such as those Microsoft publishes for [Java on Azure](https://docs.microsoft.com/java/azure/?WT.mc_id=link-refcard-jogiles)). Both of these are equally important to developers, but it is important to understand that they serve different purposes. In this chapter we will cover JavaDoc, as it is more relevant to our interests as API developers.

JavaDoc should act as the specification of the API. Engineers responsible for writing API should consider it part of their job to ensure that a JavaDoc is complete, with class-level and method-level overviews, specifying the expected inputs, outputs, exceptional circumstances, and any other detail. Whilst this documentation acts as the specification, it is important that it does not become an overly detailed guide to the programmer, or discuss how the implementation works.

In an ideal world, the effort to create high quality JavaDoc would go a step further, to also include code snippets that users can copy/paste into their own software to kick start their own development. These code snippets need not be long screeds of code - it is best if they are constrained to no more than five to ten lines of code. These code snippets can be added to the JavaDoc of the relevant class or method over time, as users start to ask questions on the API.

The value of JavaDoc extends beyond offering it to other developers - it can also help us. This is because JavaDoc gives us a filtered view of our SDK by only showing API that is intended for public use. If we establish a routine of regularly generating JavaDoc we can review our API for issues such as missing JavaDoc, leaking implementation classes or external dependencies, and other things that aren't what we expect.

As most Java projects are based on Maven or Gradle, generating JavaDocs for a project is typically as simple as running `mvn javadoc:javadoc` or `gradle javadoc`, respectively. Getting into the habit of generating this documentation (especially with settings configured to fail on any error or warning) on a regular basis ensures that we are always able to spot API issues early, and remind ourselves of areas of our API that need more JavaDoc content to be written.

{book: false}
## JavaDoc for Behavioral Contracts

One underutilised aspect of JavaDoc is to use it to specify behavioral contracts. An example of a behavioral contract is the `Arrays.sort()` method, which guarantees it is 'stable' (that is, equal elements are not reordered). There is no way to easily specify this guarantee as part of the API itself (aside from making our API unwieldy, e.g. `Arrays.stableSort()`), but JavaDoc is an ideal location for this.

However, if we add behavioral contracts as part of our JavaDoc, this then becomes as much a part of our API as the API itself. We can not change this behavioral contract with the same level of consideration, as it will potentially cause downstream issues for your users.

{book: false}
## JavaDoc Tags

JavaDoc ships with a [number of tags](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/windows/javadoc.html#CHDJFCCC) such as `@link`, `@param`, and `@return`, which provide more context to the JavaDoc tooling, and which therefore enables a richer experience when HTML output is generated. It is extremely useful when writing JavaDoc content to keep these in the back of your mind, to ensure that they are all used when relevant. To understand when to use each of these tags, refer to the ['Tag Comments' section](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/windows/javadoc.html#CHDJFCCC) of the Java Platform, Standard Edition Tools Reference documentation.

{book: false}
### Code samples {#general-documentation-code-samples}

Code samples are small applications that demonstrate a certain feature that is relevant to the client library, allowing developers to more quickly understand the full usage requirements of a particular set of API. Code samples should not be any more complex than they need to be to demonstrate this feature - they should not become full applications. At all times code samples should have a very high signal:noise ratio between useful code and boilerplate code for non-related reasons.

~ Must
include code samples alongside your library's code within the repository. The samples should clearly and succinctly demonstrate the operations most developers need to perform with your library. Include samples for every common operation, and especially for those that are complex or might otherwise be difficult for new users of your library. At a bare minimum, include samples for the champion scenarios you've identified for the library.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-location}
place code samples within the `/src/samples/java` directory within the client library root directory. This ensures that the code will be compiled, but not packaged into the resulting jar.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-execution}
ensure that each sample file is executable by including a `public static void main(String[] args)` method.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-use-latest-conventions}
use the latest coding conventions when creating samples. It is recommended to make liberal use of modern Java syntax and API such as diamond operators, etc as they remove boilerplate from your samples and let your library's API shine through better. Do not use any language feature or API of Java beyond the current Java baseline versioned employed by the SDK, currently this is JDK 8.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-maintained}
keep sample code maintained and using the latest major release of the library. Sample code repos must be reviewed for freshness and at least one commit must be made to a sample repo every semester - at least to update dependencies to the latest release and to ensure that the code continues to function as expected.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-easy-grafting}
ensure that code samples can be easily grafted from the documentation into a users own application and not tied to variable declarations not covered in previous samples in the content.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-keep-simple}
ensure that code samples are optimized for ease of reading and comprehension over code compactness and efficiency unless the article context demands otherwise.
~

~ Must {#java-samples-cross-platform}
ensure that samples can run in Windows, macOS, and Linux development environments, and are not tied to a non-standard developer toolchain.
~

~ Must
build and test your code samples using the repository's continuous integration (CI) to ensure they remain functional.
~

~ MustNot
combine more than one operation in a code sample unless it's required for demonstrating the type or member, or it's *in addition to* existing samples that demonstrate atomic operations. For example, a Cosmos DB code samples should not include both account and container creation operations--create two different samples, one for account creation, and one for container creation.

Combined operations cause unnecessary friction for a library consumer by requiring knowledge of additional operations which might be outside their current focus. It requires them to first understand the tangential code surrounding the operation they're working on, then carefully extract just the code they need for their task. The developer can no longer simply copy and paste the code sample into their project.
~

{book: false}
#### JavaDoc

~ Must {#java-javadoc-easy-generation}
ensure that anybody can clone the repo containing the client library and execute `mvn javadoc:javadoc` to generate the full and complete JavaDoc output for the code, without any need for additional processing steps.
~

~ Must {#java-javadoc-code-samples}
include code samples in all class-level JavaDoc, as well as code samples in relevant method-level JavaDoc. Include these code samples dynamically using the tooling outlined below to ingest the code at build time, rather than hard-code it within the JavaDoc (where it may become stale).
~

~ Must
follow the steps below to correctly ingest code samples from Java source files into the generated JavaDoc. Let's assume we want to insert code samples into the JavaDoc of a class named `ClientBuilder` in the `com.azure.clientlibrary` package, located within the `src/main/java` directory:

1. If it does not already exist, create a source directory named `src/samples/java`.
2. Create a Java package with the same name as the package of the source class for which JavaDoc will be generated (for our example, this is `com.azure.clientlibrary`).
3. Create a class with the name `<SourceClass>JavaDocCodeSamples` (for example, `ClientBuilderJavaDocCodeSamples`)
4. Write necessary code samples that you want to insert into the generated javadocs of the source class.
5. Wrap the code samples with `BEGIN` and `END` comments as shown below. Note that sample names containing some special characters like underscore, comma, parenthesis do not work.

```java
    // BEGIN: mysampletag1
    … your code sample here …
    // END: mysampletag1
```

6. To use the code sample enclosed within the `BEGIN` and `END` comments, go to the source class and in the javadoc section, add the following:

```java
    /**
     * {@codesnippet mysampletag1}
     */
```

7. Now, run a Maven build to generate the JavaDoc output, to ensure the sample is included in the output. The Maven command to run is the following: `mvn install -DskipTests -Dinclude-non-shipping-modules -Dgpg.skip=true -f pom.client.xml`
~

~ Must
follow the naming convention outlined below for naming samples tags:

 * If a new instance of the class is created through build() method of a builder or through constructor: `<packagename>.<classname>.instantiation`
 * For other methods in the class: `<packagename>.<classname>.<methodName>`
 * For overloaded methods, or methods with arguments: `<packagename>.<classname>.<methodName>#<argType1>-<argType2>`
~