---
jlbp:
  id: JLBP-14
permalink: /JLBP-14
draft: true
title: Document your deprecation policy
---

{% include links.md %}

Our goal in library development is to [resist breaking changes](/JLBP-6), because breaks interrupt our users and restrict their ease of upgrading to newer releases. Unfortunately, there are times when APIs need to evolve to take into account changes in requirements, understanding, or user demands. There are various ways in which an API may evolve, such as:

* Adding or removing an additional argument into a method.
* Changing the type of an argument into a method.
* Changing the return type of a method.
* Adding additional methods or abstract methods to an interface / abstract class.

In many of these cases, during the evolution of our API, we may be in a position where replaced API is no longer relevant, correct, or the best it could be. We could of course take the easy path and just replace the old API and introduce a break, but this isn't overly user friendly. 

Fortunately, we've already talked about [semantic versioning](/JLBP-5) elsewhere, so we have in our toolset the ability to do breaking changes when required. However, before we jump to breaking changes and major semantic version increments, we should ensure that we've developed, communicate, and continue over time to adhere to a deprecation policy that allows our users the opportunity to respond to breaking changes before they take effect.

## What exactly is deprecation?

For a very long time, Java releases applied the appropriate deprecation annotations, but the API lingered through many releases to ensure backwards compatibility. More recently, the final act of following through on deprecation by removing deprecated functionality has become increasingly accepted. The JDK in more recent releases has taken to cleaning out some deprecated functionality, and [improving the `@Deprecated` annotation](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/277) to enable identification of when an API was deprecated, and if it is planned for removal.

It could be said that deprecation is baked into the Java ethos. We should strive to see deprecation and removal as a last resort, but also as a useful tool in our toolset to ensure that we deliver developers the best developer experience.

Whenever we decide to deprecate an API, we should use the JavaDoc `@deprecated` tag to document the deprecation, as well as the `@Deprecated` annotation.

## How do I document a deprecation policy?

> TODO