---
jbp:
  id: JBP-2
permalink: /JBP-2
draft: true
title: Minimize dependencies
---

{% include links.md %}

The Java ecosystem is great for its breadth and depth of libraries. Their availability helps to fill in gaps in the JDK, and they make us all much more productive. The problem with dependencies is the fact that everyones development style and philosophy around breaking changes, versioning, dependency management, and so on is all so varied, and we import these different approaches into our projects when we include a dependency. We have to be sure that these dependencies pay for the cost of including it.

## What is the cost of a dependency?

When a dependency is included in a project, we have to assume that the dependency will be included in the project forever. The biggest concerns that we must have with bringing in dependencies are:

1. Each dependency brings with it the potential for security vulnerabilities.
2. Each dependency typically has other dependencies, forming a transitive dependency chain.
3. Transitive dependencies from different direct dependencies may conflict with each other, resulting in runtime exceptions.

## Don't duplicate functionality

Because there are so many libraries out in the Java ecosystem, it is commonly the case that we will find ourselves with dependencies on multiple libraries that provide essentially the same functionality, for example Jackson and Gson for JSON processing. Often the choice of which library should be used directly by our project is already made for us by being a transitive dependency of another dependency. For example, Spring is tightly bound to Jackson for its JSON processing needs.