---
jbp:
  id: JBP-7
permalink: /JBP-7
title: Use the latest Java long-term support release
---

{% include links.md %}

New Java releases are made every six months, with some versions designated as 'long-term support' (or LTS). These LTS releases are made every three years, with the most recent LTS releases being Java 11 and Java 17 in September 2018 and September 2021.

Non‑LTS releases are considered a cumulative set of implementation enhancements of the most recent LTS release. These are good releases to test with, so that you can have higher degrees of confidence that moving to the next LTS will be straightforward, but you should avoid using non-LTS releases in production.

## Which build of Java should I use?

Java releases used to be simple - you'd download a build for a particular operating system from the Sun Microsystems website, and that was it. Today, because of the fact the OpenJDK is open source, numerous companies make available builds of the OpenJDK that are all equivalent. Some companies also offer enhanced builds of OpenJDK that offer improved performance, security, or other enhancements.

If your needs are simple and you do not require any form of support, any build of OpenJDK will be sufficient. Common choices include:

* [Microsoft's OpenJDK](https://www.microsoft.com/openjdk)
* [Oracle's OpenJDK](https://openjdk.java.net/)
* [Eclipse Temurin](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/adoptium.temurin) (formerly AdoptOpenJDK)
* [Azul Zulu](https://www.azul.com/downloads/?package=jdk)

If you are looking for a supported offering, your best choice is to choose a build from your cloud provider, such as the [Microsoft OpenJDK build](https://www.microsoft.com/openjdk), as these will offer the best integration and support options for you and your cloud of choice.

## Ecosystem support for Java 9 and later

Oftentimes the reason a Java version choice is made is because of a dependency of our project having a hard dependency on a particular version of Java. This has often been true historically (and still holds true today to an extent) for application frameworks and other critical tooling, with their dependency on Java 8 (or, more precisely, their lack of support for Java 9 and later). Every day that goes by sees this argument become less strong, as more and more of the critical libraries and frameworks we depend on beginning to support Java 9 and later. It is beneficial every release cycle, when we are looking at [updating our dependencies](/JBP-4) to identify which, if any, of our dependencies still force us back to earlier versions of Java, and to ask questions:

* Do I still need this dependency?
* Is there a suitable replacement for this dependency?
* Is this dependency still being actively developed?
* Why hasn't this dependency moved beyond Java 8?
* Can I help to unblock this dependency, with code, bug reports, or reproducible test cases?

Because our goal is to always go to production with the latest Java LTS release, we need to be increasingly clear in our own minds on what we need to do to be at that point. If the likelihood of one of our dependencies never unblocking us is too high, we should find another path if at all possible. Falling off the LTS support window is more undesirable and will grow to become more of a technical debt the longer we wait to resolve it.