---
jbp:
  id: JBP-1
permalink: /JBP-1
---
# Use BOMs whenever available

A BOM is a *Bill of Materials* that in the Java ecosystem is typically represented as a specialized Maven POM file. It includes details of many libraries, including a specific version number. When a project decides to include a BOM dependency, the project is relieved of the requirement of specifying a dependency version for any library that is specified within the BOM file. In fact, it is encourage that when a BOM dependency is taken, any explicit dependency versions specified in your projects configuration file (be it a Maven `pom.xml`, a Gradle `build.gradle`, or something else) be removed, so that version decisions are left up to the BOM.

It is really important to note that including a BOM dependency does not imply that all of the dependencies listed within the BOM are automatically dependencies of the project depending on the BOM. In fact, including a BOM dependency results in zero immediate changes to your project, except that there is a new place to look for dependency versions when a dependency is specified without any versions.

## The benefits of BOMs

The immediate question to ask is: why use BOMs? The answer is simply that the people publishing a BOM have likely taken some amount of effort to ensure that the dependencies listed within the BOM work together. For example, in the Azure SDK for Java, the dependencies listed in the BOM are tested (and proven through rigorous tooling) to ensure that the transitive closure of all dependencies is as minimal as possible (which is just a fancy way of saying we really try our hardest to avoid dependency conflicts for you).

## How to use a BOM

### Maven

> TODO

### Gradle

> TODO